Sourav Ganguly is a name that polarised Indian cricket fans like possibly no other. While he claims an irrefutable place in the pantheon of the game, criticism was a leitmotif in his 12-year-long international career. He took it chin up, of course — first as player and then as captain. His greatest legacy, and there is no polarisation here — is that of a leader. He charted a new trajectory for Indian cricket and built a team capable enough to traverse that path. In his recently released memoir, A Century Is Not Enough, Sourav reveals everything that happened when he took over as India captain in 2000. He says that in the aftermath of the match-fixing scandal that shocked the nation and the global cricketing fraternity, his well-wishers handed him a copy of former English captain Mike Brearley’s leadership bible — The Art of Captaincy. He went on to develop his own style of leadership and a very effective one at that. In his five years as captain between 2000 and 2005, he pulled India up from #8 to #2 in the ICC rankings. By the time he hung up his boots, the Ganguly School of Captaincy had become a thing, and one to emulate. It was being taught at management schools in India and presented at corporate organisations and events. Even today, Ganguly is called to deliver talks on corporate leadership where he draws parallels from cricket. Sourav had the knack of unearthing great talent. What followed was even better. He would back these players to the hilt, give them enough confidence to fail, and see them evolve into match-winners who could single-handedly take the team home.  Virender Sehwag, Yuvraj Singh, Harbhajan Singh, Zaheer Khan — Ganguly made men out of all these boys. Each of them went on to have remarkable careers and contributed significantly to India’s victories at home and abroad, and eventually became a part of the team that lifted the World Cup in 2011. Sourav explains a captain’s conviction in his book. He writes, “I have always endorsed a leadership point of view that once you are convinced about someone's class you allow him to blossom despite a few failures. But you need patience. During my years as the Indian captain I have hand-held a few players as well. We were patient. ” He reveals how he backed Harbhajan in 2001, when the selectors wanted to drop him. The off-spinner repaid his captain’s faith with a career-defining series against Australia. That three-match series saw him pick up 32 wickets, including a hat trick — the first ever by an Indian in the longer format of the game — at the historic Eden Gardens test. Sourav writes, “I believed in throwing the younger players at the deep end. The better ones did handle themselves, swam their way and beat the odds. Bhajji for instance. The selectors wanted to drop him after the Mumbai test against Australia. They wanted to play Sarandeep Singh. 