The future of India is very clear.
India is the Guru of the world.
The future structure of the world depends on India.
India is the living soul.
India is incarnating the spiritual knowledge in the world.
India’s nature, her mission, the work that she has to do, her part in the earth’s destiny, the peculiar power for which she stands is written there in her past history and is the secret purpose behind her present sufferings and ordeals.
Each nation is a Shakti or power of the evolving spirit in humanity and lives by the principle which it embodies.
India is the Bharata Shakti, the living energy of a great spiritual conception, and fidelity to it is the very principle of her existence.
For by its virtue alone she has been one of the immortal nations; this alone has been the secret of her amazing persistence and perpetual force of custom essays survival and revival.
Even as the individual has a psychic being which is his true self, governing more or less openly his destiny, each nation too has its psychic being which is its true self, moulding its destiny from behind the veil: it is the soul of the country, the national genius, the spirit of the people, the centre of national aspiration, the fountain-head of all that is beautiful, noble, great and generous in the life of a country.
True patriots feel its presence as a tangible reality.
It is this which in India has been made almost into a divine being and all who love truly their country call it “Mother India” (Bharat Mata), and it is to her that they daily address a prayer for the welfare of their country.
It is she who symbolises and incarnates the true ideal of the country, its true mission in the world.
Everyday I used to meditate with Sri Aurobindo… in meditation I entered… I reached a place or a state of consciousness from which I told Sri Aurobindo just casually and quite simply: “India is free.” It was in 1920.
Then he put to me a question: “How?” And I answered him: “Without any fight, without a battle, without a revolution. The English themselves will leave, for the condition of the world will be such that they won’t be able to do anything else except go away.”
It was done. I spoke in the future when he asked me the question, but there where I had seen, I said, India is free, it was a fact. 
Now, India was not free at that time: it was 1920. Yet it was there, it had been done.
And it happened in 1947. That is to say, from the external physical point of view I saw it twenty-seven years in advance. But it had been done.
A reshaping of the forms of our spirit will have to take place; but it is the spirit itself behind past forms that we have to disengage and preserve and to give to it new and powerful thought-significances, culture-values, a new instrumentation, greater figures.
And so long as we recognise these essential things and are faithful to their spirit, it will not hurt us to make even the most drastic mental or physical adaptations and the most extreme cultural and social changes.
But these changes themselves must be cast in the spirit and mould of India and not in any other, not in the spirit of America or Europe, not in the mould of Japan or Russia.
The function of India is to supply the world with a perennial source of light and renovation.
Whenever the first play of energy is exhausted and earth grows old and weary, full of materialism, racked with problems she cannot solve, the function of India is to restore the youth of mankind and assure it of immortality.
She sends forth a light from her bosom which floods the earth and the heavens, and mankind bathes in it.… and recovers strength, hope and vitality for its long pilgrimage. Such a time is now at hand.