O our Mother, O Soul of India, Mother who hast never forsaken thy children even in the days of darkest depression, even when they turned away from thy voice, served other masters and denied thee, now when they have arisen and the light is on thy face in this dawn of thy liberation, in this great hour we salute thee.
Guide us so that the horizon of freedom opening before us may be also a horizon of true greatness and of thy true life in the community of the nations.
Guide us so that we may be always on the side of great ideals and show to men thy true visage, as a leader in the ways of the spirit and a friend and helper of all the peoples.
It is the flag of India’s spiritual mission. And in the accomplishment of this mission will India’s unity be accomplished.
It is by being sincere, courageous, enduring and honest that you can best serve your country, make it one and great in the world.
Let the splendour of Bharat’s past be reborn in the realisation of her imminent future with the help and blessings of her living soul.  
India must be saved for the good of the world since India alone can lead the world to peace and a new world order. 
Divine Power alone can help India. If you can build faith and cohesion in the country it is much more powerful than any man-made power. 
There must be a group forming a strong body of cohesive will with the spiritual knowledge to save India and the world.
It is India that can bring Truth in the world.
By manifestation of the Divine Will and Power alone, India can preach her message to the world and not by imitating the materialism of the West.
By following the Divine Will India shall shine at the top of the spiritual mountain and show the way of Truth and organise world unity. 
The future of India is very clear.
India is the Guru of the world.
The future structure of the world depends on India.
India is the living soul.
India is incarnating the spiritual knowledge in the world.
The Government of India ought to recognise the significance of India in this sphere and plan their action accordingly.
When India, emerging victorious from a deadly combat, regains her territorial integrity; when, emerging triumphant from a moral crisis that is more deadly still ―since instead of killing the body it destroys the soul-contact, a much greater tragedy ― India resumes her true place and mission in the world, these petty quarrels over governmental and political rivalries, which consist entirely of personal interests and ambitions, will be automatically resolved in a just and enlightened accord.
For us the 1st November has a deep significance.
We have a flag which Sri Aurobindo called the Spiritual Flag of United India.
Its square form, its colour and every detail of its design have a symbolic meaning.
It was hoisted on the 15th August 1947 when India became free.
It will now be hoisted on the 1st November 1954 when these settlements get united with India and it will be hoisted in the future whenever India recovers other parts of herself.
United India has a special mission to fulfil in the world.
Sri Aurobindo laid down his life for it and we are prepared to do the same. 
India must rise to the height of her mission and proclaim the Truth to the world.
The future of India is luminous in spite of its present gloom. 
Sometimes I have the impression that our leaders do not seem to have backbone to the same extent as Kennedy with his decision about Cuba.
This kind of thinking is quite out of place at this moment.
One should never criticise someone if one has not proved indisputably that, in the same circumstances, one can do better than he.
Do you feel yourself capable of being an unequalled Prime Minister of India? I reply: certainly not, and advise you to keep silent and to remain quiet.
Patriotic sentiments are not incompatible with our yoga – far from it – to will for the strength and the integrity of one’s Motherland is a quite legitimate sentiment, the will that she may make progress and that more and more she may manifest, in full freedom, the truth of her being, is a fine and noble will which cannot be harmful for our yoga.
But one must not get excited, one must not plunge prematurely into action.
One can and should pray, aspire and will for the victory of the truth and, at the same time, continue to discharge one’s daily duties and wait quietly for the unmistakable sign to come, indicating the action to be done.
Anyone who proclaims loudly his opinions on the present situation of the country, must understand that his opinions are of no value and cannot, in the least, help Mother India to come out of her difficulties.
If you want to be useful, first control yourself and keep silent.
It is all right. I accept. I take this occasion to tell you that I have just sent directly to Delhi the offering of the Ashram for the defence of India.
"True spirituality is not to renounce life, but to make life perfect with the Divine Perfection. This is what India must show to the world now."
Overgrow your small egoistic personality and become a worthy child of our Mother India, fulfil your duties with honesty and rectitude, and always keep cheerful and confident, with a steady trust in the Divine’s Grace.
