SRI AUROBINDO was born in Calcutta on August 15, 1872, and was taken to England at the age of seven. He studied in London and Cambridge, where he was recognised as an outstanding student. In 1893 he returned to India with the dream of seeing his country free from the British colonial burden. He was actively involved in the nationalist movement and played a fundamental role in the liberation of his country. Recognised as a threat to the Bristish, he was arrested and sent to prison in 1908. India has become the symbolic representation of all the difficulties of modern mankind. India will be the land of its resurrection - the resurrection to a higher and truer life. In the whole creation the earth has a place of distinction, because unlike any other planet it is evolutionary with a psychic entity at its centre. In it, India, in particular, is a divinely chosen country. A proposal has been made for the solution of our difficulties in organising Indian independence and it is being accepted with whatever bitterness of regret and searchings of the heart by Indian leaders. But do you know why this proposal has been made to us? It is to prove to us the absurdity of our quarrels. O our Mother, O Soul of India, Mother who has never forsaken thy children even in the days of darkest depression, even when they turned away from thy voice, served other masters and denied thee, now when they have arisen and the light is on thy face in this dawn of thy liberation, in this great hour we salute thee. Guide us so that the horizon of freedom opening before us may be also a horizon of true greatness and of thy true life in the community of the nations.
Guide us so that we may be always on the side of great ideals and show to men thy true visage, as a leader in the ways of the spirit and a friend and helper of all the peoples. It is the flag of India’s spiritual mission. And in the accomplishment of this mission will India’s unity be accomplished. Indian civilisation has been the form and expression of a culture as great as any of the historic civilisations of mankind, great in religion, great in philosophy, great in science, great in thought of many kinds, great in literature, art and poetry, great in the organisation of society and politics, great in craft and trade and commerce. The future of India is very clear. India is the Guru of the world. The future structure of the world depends on India. India is the living soul. India is incarnating the spiritual knowledge in the world. India’s nature, her mission, the work that she has to do, her part in the earth’s destiny, the peculiar power for which she stands is written there in her past history and is the secret purpose behind her present sufferings and ordeals.