Sourav Chandidas Ganguly (born 8 July 1972), affectionately known as Dada , is an Indian former cricketer, commentator and administrator who played as a left-handed opening batsman and was captain of the Indian national team.  He is the 39th and current president of the Board of Control for Cricket in India and President of the Editorial Board with Wisden India. Before being elected as the President of BCCI, he was the President of Cricket Association of Bengal, governing body for cricket in West Bengal, India. He is regarded as one of the greatest captains in the Cricket world. Sourav Ganguly is a name that polarised Indian cricket fans like possibly no other. While he claims an irrefutable place in the pantheon of the game, criticism was a leitmotif in his 12-year-long international career. He took it chin up, of course — first as player and then as captain. His greatest legacy, and there is no polarisation here — is that of a leader. He charted a new trajectory for Indian cricket and built a team capable enough to traverse that path. In his recently released memoir, A Century Is Not Enough, Sourav reveals everything that happened when he took over as India captain in 2000. Regarded as one of India’s most successful captains in modern times, Sourav Ganguly will be best remembered for his elegant cricketing style and vast contribution to cricket in India in a career spanning around 15 long years. Arguably one of the greatest players on the off-side, Ganguly's career has been a roller coaster ride since making a dream debut on the hallowed turf of the Lord's in 1996. Ganguly's ability to polarise public opinion kept him in the media glare for most part of his career -- love him or hate him but you just could not ignore him. Ganguly commented that David Gower was the first cricketer to attract him to the game. Other cricketers who had an influence on him are: David Boon, Mohinder Amarnath, Kapil Dev and Allan Border. Ganguly is a left-handed batsman whose runs came primarily from the off-side. Debashish Dutta, author of Sourav Ganguly, the maharaja of cricket, commented that throughout his career, "Ganguly played off-side shots such as the square cut, square drive and cover drive with complete command."Even today, Ganguly is called to deliver talks on corporate leadership where he draws parallels from cricket.That three-match series saw him pick up 32 wickets, including a hat trick — the first ever by an Indian in the longer format of the game — at the historic Eden Gardens test.