Sourav Ganguly is a name that polarised Indian cricket fans like possibly no other. While he claims an irrefutable place in the pantheon of the game, criticism was a leitmotif in his 12-year-long international career. His greatest legacy, and there is no polarisation here — is that of a leader. He charted a new trajectory for Indian cricket and built a team capable enough to traverse that path. In his recently released memoir, A Century Is Not Enough, Sourav reveals everything that happened when he took over as India captain in 2000. He went on to develop his own style of leadership and a very effective one at that. In his five years as captain between 2000 and 2005, he pulled India up from #8 to #2 in the ICC rankings. By the time he hung up his boots, the Ganguly School of Captaincy had become a thing, and one to emulate. It was being taught at management schools in India and presented at corporate organisations and events. In the early-to-mid 90s, the Indian team was regarded as ‘tigers at home’ and pushovers overseas. There were barely any results to show on foreign soil. When Dada, as Sourav came to be known among his teammates, was appointed captain, he vowed to change that. Overseas success was put right on top of the team’s ‘to-do’ lists. In the years that followed, Team India notched up memorable victories in England, Australia, West Indies, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. It reached the World Cup final in South Africa; that ODI team was widely believed to be the best unit to have represented India in World Cups. The new template was working, and the results started to pour in. Sourav had the knack of unearthing great talent. What followed was even better. He would back these players to the hilt, give them enough confidence to fail, and see them evolve into match-winners who could single-handedly take the team home. A leader can be a control freak. Several leaders lose the plot because they are so. Hence, man-management skills are essential in leadership. Sourav had a few. He had identified his on-ground soldiers and would let them be in critical situations. No interference, no orders. Sourav’s career hit a roadblock in 2005-06 when he was removed as captain and even dropped from the national team. Nobody, besides him, believed that he could make a comeback. Dada was convinced that he had cricket left in him and was good enough to represent the national team. It is well-documented now that Sachin told Sourav at the time of the latter’s retirement in 2008 that he was playing the best cricket of his life after coming back. Sourav’s undying self-belief led him to script one of the most remarkable comebacks sport has ever seen. His ordeal went on to prove that even successful leaders aren’t assured of their berths in a team/organisation. Towards the end of 2008, the BCCI selection committee was tilting in favour of fresh blood. He had a whiff of what was about happen when he got left out of the Rest of India squad for a domestic fixture. He made up his mind that the upcoming home series against Australia would be his last. After reaching Bengaluru, venue for the first test, Sourav announced his decision to quit to the press. In quintessential Sourav-style, he polarised the cricket world once again. While some argued that he was ill-treated by selectors and had a few more years of cricket left in him, others reckoned it was time for him to go. Most importantly, Sourav himself felt the need to do so. Sourav always had the gift of timing. In retirement too, it was impeccable!